Documentation on Telemetry procedures (#1153)
TheThingsIndustries/lorawan-stack-docs: doc/content/reference/telemetry/identity_server.md

---
title: "Identity Server Telemetry"
description: "Description of everything that the telemetry procedure collects regarding the IdentityServer"
aliases: "/telemetry/identity-server"
---

[The Things Stack]({{<ref "/the-things-stack">}})'s Identity Server collects telemetry data, which is used to help us understand how users interact with the product. For example, the current data helps to have a better insight on the user's usage of organizations. The objective with the introduction of telemetry is to be able to better understand what is used so that we can expand and improve on the experience that we provide to our users.

## Identification

The worry that data is attached to an easily identifiable piece of information is common and for good reason, therefore we believe that it is the first thing we should address.

> When the Identity Server starts the background task responsible for collecting and sending telemetry data, it generates the UID which is attached to every telemetry message that is sent, its value is nothing more than the base64 enconding of `console.ui[IS,GS,NS,AS,JS].BaseURL` values.

Reviewer: It's not base64 - that would be reversible and allow anyone to actually work back the sender identity. It's a SHA512 hash.

> The code bellow shows the exact procedure and it can also be seen on the open-source repository [here](https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/c8e625243ba8106a5240d4c5d7b0feb0fc1e9a3c/pkg/telemetry/exporter/hash.go#L23-L30).

Reviewer: Do not include this. Implementation details are not relevant for this documentation.

```go
// GenerateHash receives a string slice and returns a string of an UID.
func GenerateHash(_ context.Context, elems ...string) string {
	s := sha512.New()
	for _, elem := range elems {
		s.Write([]byte(elem + ":"))
	}
	return base64.StdEncoding.EncodeToString(s.Sum(nil))
}
```

> {{< note >}}

Reviewer: I would skip this note as it is not relevant.

If you are running the enterprise version, the license ID is also included in the hash in order to guarantee uniqueness.

> {{</ note >}}

Reviewer: I think section we should also mention how users can use the `UIDElements`to avoid having the UID be generated from their URLs.

Reviewer: I would say that we should include it, because otherwise it is possible to work back the UID if you know the domain. For some users this is fine, but probably not for all of them. The alternative is to have an `UID` override in the config which overrides the CLI automatically generated one and the derived one from the URLs.

Author: Agree, will change it on the enable Telemetry PR then

## Types of telemetry data

Bellow is an JSON object with an example of a full telemetry data message that is sent from the Identity Server to us:

```json
{
  "message": {
    "uid": "m64Jv5T3Bqnxz3tSgOAYD0w25UqWwP5DgIsuKbS0g5dBQkA8ZEHwlV1iDoKgjeF7uE3dt+3SDMdANJ41xDZqag==",
    "os": {
      "operating_system": "linux",
      "arch": "amd64",
      "binary_version": "3.27.0-dev",
      "golang_version": " go1.20.7"
    },
    "cli": null,
    "entities_count": {
      "gateways": {
        "total": 0,

>         "gateways_by_frequency_plan_id": {}

Reviewer: This should have a small example of contents, otherwise people may interpret it as us providing gateway IDs/names to the collection server.

---
title: "Identity Server Telemetry"
description: "Description of everything that the telemetry procedure collects regarding the IdentityServer"
aliases: "/telemetry/identity-server"
---

[The Things Stack]({{<ref "/the-things-stack">}})'s Identity Server collects telemetry data, which is used to help us understand how users interact with the product. For example, the current data helps to have a better insight on the user's usage of organizations. The objective with the introduction of telemetry is to be able to better understand what is used so that we can expand and improve on the experience that we provide to our users.

> 

Reviewer 2: Please replace the last line here as well with the contents mentioned in the CLI section.

## Identification

> The worry that data is attached to an easily identifiable piece of information is common and for good reason, therefore we believe that it is the first thing we should address.

Reviewer 2: Same, please remove this.

> When the Identity Server starts the background task responsible for collecting and sending telemetry data, it generates the UID which is attached to every telemetry message that is sent, its value is nothing more than the SHA512 hash of `console.ui[IS,GS,NS,AS,JS].BaseURL` values.

Reviewer 2: Remove `is nothing more than`.

## Types of telemetry data

> Bellow is an JSON object with an example of a full telemetry data message that is sent from the Identity Server to us:

Reviewer 2: `Below`. Also remove `to us`

          "US_902_928_FSB_1": 1,
          "US_902_928_FSB_2": 1
        }
      },
      "end_devices": {
        "total": 0,
        "activate_end_devices": {
          "total": 0,
          "last_day": 0,
          "last_week": 0,
          "last_month": 0
        }
      },
      "applications": {
        "total": 0
      },
      "accounts": {
        "users": {
          "stan dard": 0,
          "admin": 1
        },
        "organizations": {
          "total": 0
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

{{< note >}}
All new data collected will be added bellow with the respective version in which the field was introduced. 
{{</ note >}}

List of fields and its purpose on by version:

{{< new-in-version "3.27.1">}}
- `uid`: identifier which is built from the base64 encoding of URLs set in the configuration.
- `os`: basic information about the operating system of the machine which executed the CLI.
- `entities_count`: Data regarding the amount of each entity and its possible states, a few examples are: the amount of active end-devices in the last 24 hours, amount of gateway by frequency plan ID and the total amount of organizations.

## Disable telemetry

> The telemetry is enabled by default and in order to disable it, set `telemetry.enable` to false in the Stack configuration.

Reviewer 2: `{{ % tts % }}` instead of `Stack`

---
title: "Identity Server Telemetry"

> description: "Description of everything that the telemetry procedure collects regarding the IdentityServer"

Reviewer 2: `Data collection by The Things Stack CLI Identity Server`

aliases: "/telemetry/identity-server"
---

{{% tts %}}'s Identity Server collects telemetry data, which is used to help us understand how users interact with the product. For example, the current data helps to have a better insight on the user's usage of organizations. Telemetry collection is **enabled** by default and does **not** collect personally identifiable information. The following section explains what information is collected and how it is anonymised.

## User's Identification

When the Identity Server starts the background task responsible for collecting and sending telemetry data, it generates the UID which is attached to every telemetry message that is sent. UID value is the SHA512 hash of `console.ui[IS,GS,NS,AS,JS].BaseURL` values.

{{< note >}}

> For cases where using these values is not acceptable to the user, there is an option to set your own list of elements used to create the SHA512 hash. Edit [{{% tts %}}'s configuration]({{< ref "reference/configuration" >}}) and set `telemetry.uid-elements` to a list of string values of your choice.

Reviewer 2: Replace `For cases where using these values is not acceptable to the user,` with `If you want the telemetry collector to use a different list of elements`.

Author: Changed a bit more than that, let me know what you think of the change

          "US_902_928_FSB_1": 1,
          "US_902_928_FSB_2": 1
        }
      },
      "end_devices": {
        "total": 0,
        "activate_end_devices": {
          "total": 0,
          "last_day": 0,
          "last_week": 0,
          "last_month": 0
        }
      },
      "applications": {
        "total": 0
      },
      "accounts": {
        "users": {
          "stan dard": 0,
          "admin": 1
        },
        "organizations": {
          "total": 0
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

List of telemetry data fields and their purpose:

- `uid`: identifier which is built from the base64 encoding of URLs set in the configuration
- `os`: basic information about the operating system of the machine which executed the CLI
- `entities_count`: data regarding the amount of each entity and its possible states, e.g. the amount of active end devices in the last 24 hours, the amount of gateways per frequency plan ID, the total amount of organizations, etc

## Disable Telemetry

Telemetry collection is enabled by default and in order to disable it, set `telemetry.enable` to `false` in the [{{% tts %}} configuration]({{< ref "reference/configuration" >}}):

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: Nit: New line before code blocks

---
title: "Identity Server Telemetry"
description: "Description of everything that the telemetry procedure collects regarding the IdentityServer"
aliases: "/telemetry/identity-server"
---

> [The Things Stack]({{<ref "/the-things-stack">}})'s Identity Server collects telemetry data, which is used to help us understand how users interact with the product. For example, the current data helps to have a better insight on the user's usage of organizations. Telemetry collection is enabled by default and does not collect personally identifiable information. Telemetry collection is enabled by default and does not collect personally identifiable information. The following section section explains what information is collected and how it is anonymised.

Reviewer 3: No need to put ref to TTS, but there's need to put ref to Identity Server :) also, use {{% tts %}} always instead of "The Things Stack"

Reviewer 3: I also see this whole part is the same as for the CLI telemetry doc. Why don't you put it to /telemetry then? It's also weird that you stressed how this data collection proces is **completely anonymous** for the CLI, but not here. What do you refer to when you say "current data"?

Author: Is a very small difference but for some users they might and can change what values the Stack will use to generate the userID, meaning that they are in control of what is used to generate the hash.

OBS: In this comment and in the previous comment I used `userID` in multiple phrases but it is meant to reference the Identifier used when collecting information, it is not linkable to the User by itself. Meaning that is not possible to do `Hash(ID) -> User Information` but it is possible to do `UserInformation -> TelemetryID` in the Stack.

Author: Removed the **completely anonymous** words from the CLI description, if you think this paragraph is good enough we could remove it from the CLI and IS descriptions and leave it on the `index.md`

Reviewer 3: Great, I understand the difference now so this makes sense. And yeah, it would be good to move it to index.md

> ## Identification

Reviewer 3: Again, identification of what?

> When the Identity Server starts the background task responsible for collecting and sending telemetry data, it generates the UID which is attached to every telemetry message that is sent, its value is the SHA512 hash of `console.ui[IS,GS,NS,AS,JS].BaseURL` values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the Identity Server starts the background task responsible for collecting and sending telemetry data, it generates the UID which is attached to every telemetry message that is sent. UID value is the SHA512 hash of `console.ui[IS,GS,NS,AS,JS].BaseURL` values.
```

{{< note >}}

> For cases where using these values is not acceptable to the user, there is the option to set your own list of elements used to create the SHA512 hash. Set `telemetry.uid-elements` to a list of string values of your choice.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For cases where using these values is not acceptable to the user, there is an option to set your own list of elements used to create the SHA512 hash. Set `telemetry.uid-elements` to a list of string values of your choice.
```

Reviewer 3: How do you set `telemetry.uid-elements`? Where?

Author: Updated the note to reference to the Stack's configuration and left an example in there as well.

{{</ note >}}

> ## Types of telemetry data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Telemetry Data Types
```

> Below is an JSON object with an example of a full telemetry data message that is sent from the Identity Server:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Below is a JSON object with an example of a full telemetry data message that is sent from the Identity Server:
```

```json
{
  "message": {
    "uid": "m64Jv5T3Bqnxz3tSgOAYD0w25UqWwP5DgIsuKbS0g5dBQkA8ZEHwlV1iDoKgjeF7uE3dt+3SDMdANJ41xDZqag==",
    "os": {
      "operating_system": "linux",
      "arch": "amd64",
      "binary_version": "3.27.0-dev",
      "golang_version": " go1.20.7"
    },
    "cli": null,
    "entities_count": {
      "gateways": {
        "total": 0,
        "gateways_by_frequency_plan_id": {
          "US_902_928_FSB_1": 1,
          "US_902_928_FSB_2": 1
        }
      },
      "end_devices": {
        "total": 0,
        "activate_end_devices": {
          "total": 0,
          "last_day": 0,
          "last_week": 0,
          "last_month": 0
        }
      },
      "applications": {
        "total": 0
      },
      "accounts": {
        "users": {
          "stan dard": 0,
          "admin": 1
        },
        "organizations": {
          "total": 0
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

{{< note >}}

> All new data collected will be added below with the respective version in which the field was introduced. 

Reviewer 3: same comment as in section above

{{</ note >}}

> List of fields and its purpose on by version:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
List of telemetry data fields and their purpose on by version:
```

{{< new-in-version "3.27.1">}}

> - `uid`: identifier which is built from the base64 encoding of URLs set in the configuration.
> - `os`: basic information about the operating system of the machine which executed the CLI.
> - `entities_count`: Data regarding the amount of each entity and its possible states, a few examples are: the amount of active end-devices in the last 24 hours, amount of gateway by frequency plan ID and the total amount of organizations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `uid`: identifier which is built from the base64 encoding of URLs set in the configuration
- `os`: basic information about the operating system of the machine which executed the CLI
- `entities_count`: data regarding the amount of each entity and its possible states, e.g. the amount of active end devices in the last 24 hours, the amount of gateways per frequency plan ID, the total amount of organizations, etc.
```

> ## Disable telemetry

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Disable Telemetry
```

The telemetry is enabled by default and in order to disable it, set `telemetry.enable` to `false` in the {{% tts %}} configuration.

Example of the configuration file with telemetry disabled:
```yaml
telemetry:
  enable: false
```

## Visualization

> The visualization of the usage data collected is displayed at `https://telemetry.thethingsstack.io`.

Reviewer 3: see comment for this in section above
